DOCUMENT: ADULT EGRET AND HERON RESCUE AND CARE
Physical Description:Herons and egrets stand up tall. They have long necks and long
legs, and sharp pointed beaks. Their feet have four toes - three in the front and one in
the back. Most egret species are white.
IMPORTANT Information:
* IMPORTANT:Any adult heron or egretthat does notfly or walk away when
approached is likely in distress and needs immediate rescue.
* IMPORTANT:Always wear eye protection, long sleeves, and gloves when
rescuing shorebirds like egrets and herons. You must protect your eyes.
* IMPORTANT:Shorebirds can be carriers of Avian Influenza(HPAI). Always wear
eye protection, gloves, and a maskwhen handling thesebirds. Wash hands
and shoes with soap and waterafter handling thesebirds to reduce the risk of
transmission.

Section 1: How to Rescue an Adult Heron or Egret
1. Prepare for Safety:
* Use alarge cardboard boxthat can be closed and hasair holes (or an
appropriately-sized pet carrier) lined with a towel or paper towels.
* IMPORTANT:ALWAYS weareye protection(safety glassesor large
glasses/sunglasses). Wearlong sleevesfor arm protection. Heavy
glovesare recommended.
* Always wear a maskto prevent potential exposure to Avian Influenza
(HPAI).
* Have the box beside youas you prepare to rescue thebird.
* Find someone to help you. Wildlife rescue is bestdone with more than
one person helping.
2. Rescue Procedure:
* Step 1:Place a large towel or blanket over the bird, ensuring the bird can
breathe.
* Step 2:Lift the bird from behind with both hands, like a football, holding
the birds body low and away from your body to avoid injury. Gently control
the neck and head from behind if necessary.
* Step 3:Keep the birds head under control and coveredby the towel or
blanket. These birds will aim for your eyes, so ALWAYS have eye
protection on.

* Step 4:Place the bird into the box, leaving the towel loose enough so the
bird can move out from under it. Close the lid tightly.
DO NOT offer food or water: Captured birds are stressed and will not eat or drink. Any
liquid may soak the feathers and lead to hypothermia.
Transportthe bird to a wildlife center as soon aspossible.
If necessary, keep the bird in awarm, dark, quietspace overnight. Keep children and
pets away, and avoid peeking, as human presence is stressful for the bird.

Final Reminders:
* IMPORTANT: Always prioritize safety: If unsure abouth and ling, seek trained
wildlife assistance. Always wear eye protection-these birds use their beaks to
defend themselves
* Avian Influenza (HPAI) Protection:Always useeyeprotection, gloves, and a
maskwhen handling water birds, andwash thoroughlyafter handling.

