OPOSSUM RESCUE AND CARE
Overview:The Virginia Opossum(Didelphis virginiana)is North America's only native
marsupial. They are a medium-sized, nocturnal mammal known for their distinctive
appearance and adaptable nature.
Physical Description:
An adult opossum is about the size of a domestic cat; 2 to 3 feet long including the tail,
and weighs 4-14 pounds. Opossums have coarse, grayish-white fur on the body with a
lighter face and darker legs. They have a white, pointed face with a long, pink nose and
dark eyes. The tail is long, hairless, and prehensile-used for grasping and balance.
Opossums are marsupial mammals: Females carry and nurse their young in a pouch for
about 2 months after birth.
Determine the age of the opossum. Rescue instructions differ depending on the
age of the animal.
Observe the opossums size and physical features to determine her age.
Baby Opossum:Small, shorter than a soda can fromthe tip of her nose to the base of
her tail, no fur (pink/naked), or fluffy gray fur and short tail.
Adult or juvenile:Longer than six inches from thetip of the nose to the base of the tail.
Coarse whitish-gray fur. May show all 50 teeth in a defensive display and hiss.
RESCUE STEP 1:Determine if the opossum requires rescue
* A baby opossum alone ALWAYS needs rescue. ALWAYS INCLUDE: If you find
one baby opossum alone, always check for others. A litter can have as many as
13 baby opossums.
* An adult opossum that is obviously injured, trapped in something, or has been
caught by anot her animal (like a cat or a dog) ALWAYS needs rescue.
* However, opossums may play dead, which is a natural involuntary
response to a threat or to stress. When an opossum plays dead, the body
goes limp, the eyes may glaze over, the mouth hangs open, a foul smell is
released from the opossums anal gl and s. This scent mimics the odor of a
decaying corpse, which can deter predators. This response is involuntary;
it isn't a conscious choice. The opossum doesnt decide to act; its body
shuts down in response to fear. It can remain in this state for several

minutes to several hours. Recovery is gradual: When the danger has
passed, the opossum slowly regains consciousness, often in a dazed
state. It may look around carefully before getting up and moving away.
* If an opossum was moving normally and suddenly appears dead, it could
be playing dead. Leave the animal alone and observe for 10 or more
minutes. If the animal doesnt recover, he needs to be rescued.

To Rescue a Baby or Juvenile Opossum:
1. Equipment Needed:
a. Lightweight gloves
b. A small towel or dish towel
c. A container lined with something soft that has air holes pre-punched in it.
2. To Rescue:
a. Toss a lightweight towel or cloth over the opossum.
b. Wearing gloves and eye protection, gently lift the young opossum.
c. Place the opossum in the container and close the lid.
d. Bring the opossum to care as soon as possible.
e. If there is a delay in getting the opossum to care, you will need to supply
supplemental heat for the little one. Only put the heat source under one
side of the container to allow the opossum to roll away if he gets too hot.
To Rescue an Adult opossum:
1. Equipment Needed:
a. Eye protection
b. Thick gloves
c. Long sleeves
d. A towel
e. A large box or container with a lid or a pet kennel lined with a towel
2. To Rescue the Opossum:
a. Wear gloves and long sleeves.
b. Have a towel ready
c. With the container beside you, throw something over the animal to restrain
him. ALWAYS INCLUDE: Toss a towel over the opossum to restrain him,
making note of where his head is.
d. With hands protected, lift the opossum from behind.

i. Make sure the face is pointed away from your body
e. Place the opossum in the box and close the lid.

