RAPTOR RESCUE AND CARE
Overview:
Raptors are birds of prey (hawks, owls, falcons, and vultures) with sharp talons and a
sharp beak that can cause serious injury to humans. Always wear heavy gloves, eye
protection, and have a large towel or blanket ready before attempting a rescue.
Physical Description of a Raptor:Adult raptors havesleek feathers, usually in shades
of brown, gray or black with white accents. These birds have large eyes and a large,
sharp beak. Their feet are also large, and they have sharp talons (large black claws)
that can be very dangerous.
Note that vultures do not have talons, but they should still be treated as raptors.
Baby owls (owlets) are covered with very fluffy white or gray downy feathers. They have
large eyes, sharp beaks, and big feet with large talons (black claws). Many baby raptors
have big yellow feet. Baby hawks are covered with downy white fluffy feathers. They
have a large, sharp beak and big feet with large talons (claws). Baby vultures are
covered with downy white fluffy feathers. They have a green face and make a loud
hissing sound.
Determine the age of the raptor.
Observe the raptor's size and physical features to determine her age.
1. Nestling
* Appearance:Covered in downy white or gray fluff. May seem weak or
wobbly. Cant walk or flap very well. May be defensive.
2. Fledgling or brancher
* Appearance:Mostly covered in downy white or grayfluff, but with some
adult feathers showing. Can walk and flap. Will likely be very defensive.
3. Adult or Subadult
* Appearance:Adult raptors have sleek feathers, usuallyin shades of
brown, gray or black. They have large eyes and large, sharp beaks. Their
feet are also large, and they have talons (sharp, black claws) that can be
very dangerous.
* Note:Adult raptors can bedangerousto handle.
RESCUE STEP 1: Determine if the animal requires rescue
* A nestling raptor ALWAYS needs rescue.
* A fledgling raptor on the ground ALWAYS needs rescue

* An adult raptor that doesnt fly away from you ALWAYS needs rescue.
RESCUE STEP 2: Determine if wildlife professionals should be called in
* Nestling raptor: No. With care and proper protective gear, you should be able to
safely rescue this baby raptor yourself
* Fledgling raptor: No. With care and proper protective gear, you should be able to
rescue this young raptor yourself
* Adult raptor: Yes. Adult raptors can be hazardous to handle. IMPORTANT:
Always call for professional assistance before attempting to rescue.
RESCUE STEP 3: Collect protective gear as needed
ALWAYS INCLUDE: Heavy gloves, long sleeves, eye protection, two heavy towels or
blankets. Note: Gardening gloves, ski gloves or mechanics gloves are too thin and will
not offer enough protection. Get heavy gloves and a thick towel or blanket for
protection. The raptors talons can easily puncture light gloves and cause serious injury.
RESCUE STEP 4: Prepare a container for the rescued animal
ALWAYS INCLUDE: Use a large box or bin with a lid and pre-punched air holes or a
large pet carrier. Line the container with a towel.
Note: if the raptor is a baby, you will need to provide heat if you cant get him into care
quickly.
RESCUE STEP 5: Have anot her person assist. Raptorsof all ages have sharp talons
and can cause injury. Rescue will be more successful and safer with a second person
assisting.
RESCUE STEP 6: With the container beside you, throw something over the bird to
restrain him.
ALWAYS INCLUDE: Toss a towel/blanket over the raptor to restrain him, making note of
where his head and feet are.

RESCUE STEP 7: With hands protected, lift the bird from behind. Make sure the
feet and talons are pointed away from your body. Place the bird in the box and
close the lid.
ALWAYS INCLUDE: Wearing the heavy gloves, or using a second towel to protect your
hands, lift the raptor from behind and away from your body. Use the towel to contain the

birds wings close to his body. Make sure his feet and talons are pointed away from your
body. IMPORTANT: Keep the birds feet and talons pointed away from you. Do not put
yourself at risk.
RESCUE STEP 8: Does the animal need to be kept warm? Follow instructions if
so.
**IF animal age is adult: No. An adult raptor does not need supplemental head
**IF animal age is fledgling: Yes. A fledgling raptor should have a supplemental heat
source. IMPORTANT: Only place the heat source under half of the container so the
animal has the option to roll off the heat if he gets too hot.
**IF animal age is nestling: Yes. A nestling bird of any species needs supplemental
heat. IMPORTANT: Only place the heat source under half of the container so the bird
has the option to roll off the heat if he gets too hot.
RESCUE STEP 10: Transport the animal to care as soon as possible.
ALWAYS INCLUDE: Do NOT offer food or water. A stressedanimal will not eat, and
food and water will spill and stick to the birds feathers. Stay quiet and do not peek at
the animal because human presence is stressful for wildlife.

