RAVEN RESCUE AND CARE
Overview:
A raven is a large bird with a very strong beak that can cause serious injury to humans.
Always wear heavy gloves, eye protection, and have a large towel or blanket ready
before attempting a rescue.
Physical Description of a Raven:Adult ravens arelarge birds that have sleek black
feathers.
Determine the age of the raven.
Observe the raven's size and physical features to determine her age.
1. Nestling
* Appearance:Naked and pink with a large head and beak. May have
some gray or black fluff on the body. May seem weak or wobbly. Cant
walk or flap very well. May be defensive.
2. Fledgling
* Appearance:Mostly covered in fluffy gray or blackfeathers, but with
some adult feathers showing. Can walk and flap. Will likely be very
defensive.
3. Adult or Subadult
* Appearance:Adult ravens have sleek black feathers. They have large,
sharp beaks.
* Note:Adult ravens can bechallengingto handle.
RESCUE STEP 1: Determine if the animal requires rescue
* A nestling raven ALWAYS needs rescue.
* A fledgling raven on the ground ALWAYS needs rescue
* An adult raven that doesnt fly away from you ALWAYS needs rescue.
RESCUE STEP 2: Collect protective gear as needed
ALWAYS INCLUDE: Heavy gloves, long sleeves, eye protection, two heavy towels or
blankets.
RESCUE STEP 3: Prepare a container for the rescued animal
ALWAYS INCLUDE: Use a large box or bin with a lid and pre-punched air holes or a
large pet carrier. Line the container with a towel.

Note: if the raven is a baby, you will need to provide heat if you cant get him into care
quickly.
RESCUE STEP 4: Have anot her person assist. Rescuewill be more successful and
safer with a second person assisting.
RESCUE STEP 5: With the container beside you, throw something over the bird to
restrain him.
ALWAYS INCLUDE: Toss a towel/blanket over the raven to restrain him, making note of
where his head and beak are.
RESCUE STEP 7: With hands protected, lift the bird from behind. Make sure the
beak is pointed away from your body. Place the bird in the box and close the lid.
ALWAYS INCLUDE: Wearing the heavy gloves, or using a second towel to protect your
hands, lift the raven from behind and away from your body. Use the towel to contain the
birds wings close to his body. Make sure his beak is pointed away from your body.
IMPORTANT: Keep the birds face and beak are pointed away from you. Do not put
yourself at risk.
RESCUE STEP 8: Does the animal need to be kept warm? Follow instructions if
so.
**IF animal age is adult: No. An adult raven does not need supplemental head
**IF animal age is fledgling: Yes. A fledgling raven should have a supplemental heat
source. IMPORTANT: Only place the heat source under half of the container so the
animal has the option to roll off the heat if he gets too hot.
**IF animal age is nestling: Yes. A nestling bird of any species needs supplemental
heat. IMPORTANT: Only place the heat source under half of the container so the bird
has the option to roll off the heat if he gets too hot.
RESCUE STEP 10: Transport the animal to care as soon as possible.
ALWAYS INCLUDE: Do NOT offer food or water. A stressedanimal will not eat, and
food and water will spill and stick to the birds feathers. Stay quiet and do not peek at
the bird because human presence is stressful for wildlife.

