SKUNK RESCUE AND CARE
Overview:
AStriped Skunkis a small to medium-sized mammalbest known for his bold
black-and-white stripes and powerful defense mechanism - a foul-smelling spray used
to deter predators.
* Adult Size:
About20-30 inches long, including the bushy tail. They typically weigh4-10
pounds, depending on species and season.
* Coloration:
Most adult skunks have glossy black fur with distinct white stripes, though
patterns can vary. Some have a single broad stripe, two thinner stripes, or even a
mostly white back. Their bold coloring is a natural warning to potential predators.
* Head & Face:
Small, pointed face with a short snout, small rounded ears, and dark, intelligent
eyes. They have a white stripe that often begins at the forehead and splits over
the shoulders.
* Tail:
Long andfluffy, often held upright when alert. Thetail can have black and white
fur intermixed or tipped with white.
Baby skunks are small like kittens. When they are neonates, their eyes are sealed shut
and they have very short velvety fur, although the black and white stripe pattern is
already visible.
A juvenile skunk is kitten-sized with a fluffy head and a fluffy tail that sticks straight up.
Key Reminders:
* NEVER handle an adult skunk with bare hands.
* Always wearheavy gloves and eye protection.
* Skunks can spray, and their spray can cause eye and skin irritation. Use a towel
or blanket to cover the skunk during the rescue.
* Call local animal control or wildlife professionals for trained assistance
before attempting any action.
.

Determine the age of the skunk.
Observe the skunk's size and physical features to determine her age.
1. Baby (Neonate):No fur or very short, thin fur (butalready striped). Eyes sealed
shut. Helpless and unable to walk.
2. Juvenile:Small and round in shape, fluffy fur, maybewobbly, short tail that sticks
straight up. Can spray.
3. Adult or Subadult:Large, fully furred, very fluffytail. Will be defensive (unless badly
injured) including stomping and growling. Can and will spray if provoked or
surprised. The spray is very caustic and can cause skin and eye irritation.
ALWAYS INCLUDE: Note:Skunks are a rabies-vectorspecies and should always
be hand led with care.

RESCUE STEP 1: Determine if the animal requires rescue
* A baby (neonate) skunk ALWAYS needs rescue.
* A juvenile skunk that is alone ALWAYS needs rescue
* An adult skunk that doesnt run away from you ALWAYS needs rescue.
RESCUE STEP 3: Determine if wildlife professionals should be called in
* Baby skunk: No. With care and proper protective gear, you should be able to
safely rescue this baby skunk yourself
* Juvenile skunk: No. With care and proper protective gear, you should be able to
rescue this young skunk yourself
* Adult skunk: Yes. Adult skunks can be hazardous to handle. IMPORTANT:
Always call for professional assistance before attempting to rescue.
RESCUE STEP 3: Have anot her person assist. Unlessthey are babies, skunks have
sharp teeth and caustic spray that can cause injury. Rescue will be more successful and
safer with a second person assisting.
To Rescue a Baby or Juvenile Skunk:
1. Equipment Needed:
a. Eye protection
b. Lightweight gloves
c. A small towel or dish towel
d. A container lined with something soft that has air holes pre-punched in it.

2. Be aware:Once a young skunk is old enough to have his eyes open, he can
spray. However, a baby or juvenile skunk only has a small amount of spray.
3. To Rescue:
a. Toss a lightweight towel or cloth over the skunk.
b. Wearing gloves and eye protection, gently lift the young skunk.
i. Keep the tail tucked under the animals body.
c. Place the skunk in the container and close the lid.
d. Bring the skunk to care as soon as possible.
e. If there is a delay in getting the skunk to care, you will need to supply
supplemental heat for the little one. Only put the heat source under one
side of the container to allow the skunk to roll away if he gets too hot.
To Rescue an Adult Skunk:
1. Equipment Needed:
a. Eye protection
b. Thick gloves
c. Long sleeves
d. Two thick towels
e. A large box or container with a lid or a pet kennel lined with a towel
f. A plastic shower curtain or large plastic garbage bag to cover your clothes
to protect you from the spray.
2. Be Aware:If a skunk is old enough to walk, that skunkcan spray. Unless the
skunk is a baby (neonate) with his eyes still sealed shut, you should assume that
the skunk can spray. Skunks can also bite and scratch.
3. To Rescue a Skunk That Is Immobile and Can NOT Walk:
a. Wear thick gloves, eye protection, and long sleeves.
b. Have two thick towels ready.
c. With the container beside you, throw something over the animal to restrain
him. ALWAYS INCLUDE: Toss a towel over the skunk to restrain him,
making note of where his head is.
d. With hands protected, lift the skunk from behind.
i. Make sure the face is pointed away from your body
ii. Keep the tail tucked under to prevent spraying.
e. Place the skunk in the box and close the lid.
4. To Rescue a Skunk That Is Mobile and CAN Walk:Ifthe skunk can walk, you
may be able to direct (herd) him into a box or bin tipped on its side.

a. Use a shower curtain or other plastic to protect yourself as you gently
herd the skunk into the container.
b. Keep the shower curtain or other plastic in front of you to deflect if the
skunk sprays
c. Move toward the skunk, watching him closely. If his tail comes up, stop
and wait until he relaxes
d. Continue moving the skunk toward the container.
e. Once he is inside the container, gently tip the container upright and put a
lid on.
RESCUE STEP 4: Transport the animal to care as soon as possible.
ALWAYS INCLUDE: Do NOT offer food or water. A stressedanimal will not eat, and
food and water will spill and stick to the skunks fur. Stay quiet and do not peek at the
skunk because human presence equals stress for wildlife.

