Snake Identification and Rescue
Rattlesnakes and other venomous snakes are very dangerous to handle. Nonvenomous
snakes are generally safe to handle if they are injured and need to be rescued, although
nonvenomous snakes can also bite.
NEVER attempt to rescue a venomous snake on your own! ALWAYS call for assistance
from local animal control!
To rescue a nonvenomous snake (do NOT attempt with a rattlesnake or anot her
venomous snake!)
1. Wear gloves or have a towel or cloth ready to protect your hands
2. Have a container ready with air holes pre-punched in the top
3. Place a cloth over the snake, paying attention to where the head is
4. Grip the snakes body through the cloth very close to the head
5. Lift the snake, using your other hand to support the body
6. Place the snake in the box
7. Bring the injured snake to care as soon as possible.
If the snake is tangled in garden netting:
ALWAYS INCLUDE: Do not attempt to cut the snake free! Bring the snake, still entangled in
the netting, to the wildlife hospital.
Identifying a Venomous vs Nonvenomous Snake (Identifying a Rattlesnake)
So, how do we know its a rattlesnake? Well, the rattles are a good clue, but not always
definitive for identifying a snake. Rattlesnakes' rattles are made of keratin, just like their
scales and our fingernails, and they are this pit vipers helpful way of warning us that hes
dangerous.
Rattlesnake babies are born with what is called a pre-button. The baby snake
loses this piece when it sheds its skin for the first time. With the first shedding, the
beginning of the snake's rattle (called a button) appears. With every shedding anot her
button, or rattle, will be added. The rattles are actually empty; the noise comes from the
segments knocking together, so until a rattlesnake has two buttons, it cant make a noise.
Babies are born live and venomous, and are often more aggressive than the adults.

However, out in the wild, the sound of rattling can be imitated by other snakes taking
advantage of the rattlesnake's frightening reputation, so the rattling sounds aren't a
definitive way to identify a snake in the field.
The shape of the snake's head is a better way to identify it. Look for a triangular head with
vertical pupils in the eyes; non-venomous snakes have an oval or thumb-shaped head.
The snakes eyes are anot her identification clue- a venomous snake has slits for pupils,
while a non-venomous snake has round pupils. Rattlesnakes also have thicker bodies than
non-venomous snakes.
Pit vipers are so-called because they have a heat-sensitive organ called a "pit" between
each eye and nostril which helps it accurately aim its strike at its warm-blooded prey. The
dark-colored pit shows up clearly on the rattlesnake's face, but you may not want to get
close enough to see it.
Living with rattlesnakes
Rattlesnakes are common, and they help us by controlling rodent populations. A recent
study of the Timber Rattlesnake demonstrated that these snakes indirectly help humankind
by keeping Lyme disease (and other rodent-borne illnesses) in check. Rodents can carry
Lyme-infected ticks, but those rodents eaten by rattlesnakes don't have the opportunity to
spread those ticks to humans.
How to Avoid Being Bitten
First of all, stay alert. Rattlesnakes live among us in sunny rocky areas. Theyll usually warn
you before they strike, but watch for them while hiking or gardening. We recommend
protecting your lower leg area with boots, or closed shoes and long pants, when hiking or

working in rocky, sun-exposed areas.
When hiking, remember to always STEP UP onto logs, rocks or other obstacles, rather than
stepping over them. A rattlesnake you cant see may be resting on the other side of the
obstacle. Stepping up gives the snake some warning that you're coming, and allows him
the chance to slither away.
Finally, let snakes be! It is often the attempt to kill or chase the snake that puts people
at risk. If the animal is cornered and approached aggressively, he is more likely to bite in
self defense. Most snakes will leave the scene and avoid confrontation if given the chance.
Rattlesnakes are preyed upon by Kingsnakes, hawks and eagles. In turn, rattlesnakes feed
on rodents, squirrels, rabbits and other small animals. Ground squirrels particularly dislike
rattlesnakes, and have developed some interesting adaptations to drive them out including
harassment, dirt-kicking and biting, immunity to venom (in some cases), and a behavior
called tail-flagging, in which the squirrels tail heats up to confuse the snakes heat-
sensing pit organs, and makes the snake think it has encountered a much larger animal.
The squirrel knows the difference between a rattlesnake and other snakes, and saves its
most aggressive confrontations for rattlers.

