SQUIRREL RESCUE AND CARE
Overview:
Asquirrelis a small to medium-sized rodent knownfor its bushy tail, quick movements,
and strong hind legs. Squirrels are commonly seen in forests, parks, and urban areas,
where they are often observed darting through trees or foraging on the ground.
Most squirrels havegray, brown, or reddish fur, largedark eyes, andsharp claws
that help them climb trees with agility. Theirlong, fluffy tailhelps with balance and acts
as a blanket in cold weather.
Squirrels arediurnal, meaning they are active duringthe day, especially in the early
morning and late afternoon. They eat a variety of foods includingnuts, seeds, fruits,
fungi, and occasionally insects or bird eggs. Knownfor their habit ofburying food for
later, squirrels play a key role in spreading seedsand supporting forest growth.
Baby squirrels are small. When they are neonates, their eyes are sealed shut and they
have pink skin and no fur, although they already have black nails.
A juvenile squirrels are small with thin tails and soft fur. They may be wobbly on their
legs.
Key Reminders:
* NEVER handle an adult squirrel with anything by HEAVY gloves and thick
towels.
* Always wearheavy gloves and eye protection.
* Squirrels can bite VERY hard and cause serious injury.
* Call local animal control or wildlife professionals for trained assistance
before attempting any action.
.
Determine the age of the squirrel - Rescue instructions differ depending on the
age of the squirrel.
Observe the squirrel's size and physical features to determine her age.
1. No Fur (Pink/Naked):
* Neonate squirrels (eyes sealed shut, small, pink)require immediate warmth
and care.
2. Short, Soft Fur, Small & Wobbly, Eyes May Be Open or Closed:

* Juvenile squirrels (small, soft fur, wobbly, thin tail) also require immediate
warmthand care.
3. Fully Furred with Bright Eyes & Fluffy Tail:
* Adult or Subadult squirrel.
* ALWAYS INCLUDE:Adult squirrels can be very dangerousto handle.
Always call for professional assistance before attempting to handle an adult
squirrel.

Does the animal require rescue?
* A baby or juvenile squirrel that can be found by a human ALWAYS needs rescue.
* An adult squirrel that doesnt run away from you ALWAYS needs rescue.
RESCUE STEP 1: Determine if wildlife professionals should be called in
* Baby squirrel: No. With care and proper protective gear, you should be able to
safely rescue this baby squirrel yourself
* Juvenile squirrel: No. With care and proper protective gear, you should be able to
rescue this young squirrel yourself
* Adult squirrel: Yes. Adult squirrels can be hazardous to handle. IMPORTANT:
Always call for professional assistance before attempting to rescue.
**IF animal age is adult ALWAYS INCLUDE: Rescuing an adult squirrel can be
hazardous. Only if you cannot reach professional assistance, and if you feel safe doing
so, please follow the instructions below to safely rescue the adult squirrel.
RESCUE STEP 2: Have anot her person assist. Squirrelshave very sharp teeth and
strong jaws that can cause serious injury. Rescue will be more successful and safer with
a second person assisting.
RESCUE STEP 3: Collect protective gear as needed
**IF animal age is adult ALWAYS INCLUDE: Heavy gloves, long sleeves, eye
protection, two heavy towels or blankets. Note that gardening gloves, ski gloves or
mechanics gloves are too thin and will not offer enough protection. Get heavy gloves
and a thick towel or blanket for protection. The squirrels teeth can easily puncture light
gloves and cause serious injury.
**IF animal age is juvenile or neonate: ALWAYS INCLUDE: Light gloves or lightweight
towel

RESCUE STEP 4: Prepare a container for the rescued animal
**IF animal age is adult ALWAYS INCLUDE: Use asturdy plastic or metal bin (with
a lid and air holes)or ahard plastic pet carrier. Do NOTuse a cardboard box, soft
pet carrier, or anything else that the squirrel can chew out of.
* Line the container with a blanket or other material. Ideally dont use
terrycloth because the squirrels nails can get tangled in it..
**IF animal age is neonate or juvenile: ALWAYS INCLUDE: Use a box or bin with a
lid and pre-punched air holes. Line the container with non-terrycloth material (the
squirrels nails will get tangled in terrycloth. You will need to provide heat for this baby
squirrel, but only put the heat under one side of the container to allow the baby to roll
away if they get too hot.

RESCUE STEP 5: With the container beside you, throw something over the animal
to restrain him.
ALWAYS INCLUDE: Toss a towel over the squirrel to restrain him, making note of
where his head is.
RESCUE STEP 6: ALWAYS INCLUDE: With hands protected, lift the squirrel from
behind. Make sure the face is pointed away from your body. Place the squirrel in
the container and close the lid.
RESCUE STEP 7: Does the animal need to be kept warm? Follow instructions if
so.
**IF animal age is adult: No. An adult squirrel does not need supplemental head
**IF animal age is juvenile or neonate: Yes. A baby squirrel should have a
supplemental heat source. IMPORTANT: Only place the heat source under half of the
container so the animal has the option to roll off the heat if he gets too hot.
RESCUE STEP 8: Transport the animal to care as soon as possible.
ALWAYS INCLUDE: Do NOT offer food or water. A stressed animal will not eat, and
food and water will spill and stick to the birds feathers. Stay quiet and do not peek at
the animal because human presence is stressful for wildlife.

